Update the structure of Synthetic monitoring section (#1725)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/synthetics-run-test.asciidoc

[[synthetic-run-tests]]
= Run synthetic tests

++++
<titleabbrev>Run synthetic tests</titleabbrev>
++++

There are two ways to run synthetic tests:

* If you want to create a single journey and manage it individually, <<synthetics-inline-journey,use an inline monitor>>.
Inline monitors can be more efficient, but have some limitations like not supporting dependencies or more than one journey.
* If you have more than one journey, rely on dependencies, or your tests need to live with your
application code, <<synthetics-test-suite,use a test suite>>.

[discrete]
[[synthetics-inline-journey]]

> == Use an inline monitor

Reviewer: Complementing my previous response to @andrewvc's comment: I think here would be a great way to explain what an inline monitor is.

Inline monitors are quick and easy to set up.

> To create one, you can copy a journey's content, paste it into Kibana or your {heartbeat} configuration, and save.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if we should put suites first.

Reading this, I see now that we have some serious UX work to do around inline monitors. So, there is a way to write inline monitors locally without using a full suite, but it's undocumented and confusing. The way to do that would be to put it in a file then invoke `cat myinline.ts | npx @elastic/synthetics --stdin`.

Now, I'm not saying we should actually document that, because that's terrible. The challenge with inline monitors is that they're really only useful for the case where we give you an example that you can copy/paste to get going. It's really hard to work on / iterate with them since, unlike suites, they don't benefit from type checking etc. that suites get being part of an NPM project.

In short, I think you wrote the right thing here, but it's something I'd like to chew on for ways to improve. My suspicion is that in the future we'll focus on a smoother script recorder flow and suites, and maybe deprecate inline monitors.

CC @paulb-elastic @drewpost @lucasfcosta @vigneshshanmugam

Reviewer: That makes total sense. I do think putting suites first would be much better, as that's what we think is the best way of using the product. IMO it would also be worth highlighting that we recommend people to use suites rather than inline monitors.

However, I'd be concerned with deprecating inline monitors. When I put myself into a user's shoes, I'd probably write a couple of inline monitors to get started with the product more quickly, and see how it works before buying in and setting up a more complex infrastructure (that's a GH repo, or the necessary automations/hooks for running things in CI and locally).

For now I also think this is the right thing to do, and would quite like to have suites first especially once we improve the UX with the monitor management UI.

Reviewer 2: My worry around people getting their feet wet with inline monitors is you don't have:

1. The easy ability to iterate and debug locally, so lot's of trial and error revolving around 'run now' in the UI
2. No syntax suggestions from typescript etc.

So, I think it's just as frustrating.

My hope is that with the push command local dev of scripts gets so easy inline largely doesn't make sense. I could be off though.

After testing locally, you can copy the script into your Elastic Synthetics integration or `heartbeat.yml`
depending on <<uptime-set-up-choose,the approach you chose>>.

--
include::tab-widgets/uptime-monitoring/run-test-inline-widget.asciidoc[]
--

[discrete]
[[synthetics-test-suite]]
== Use a test suite

If you have a suite of tests, you can use the `@elastic/synthetics` package as a library.

To test an test suite locally, start by writing your tests:

. Create a new https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npm-init[NPM/Node.js project].
. Create a `javascript` or `typescript` file that imports your tests.
All synthetic test files must use the `.journey.ts` or `.journey.js` file extension.
. Make sure any dependencies are defined with an `import` outside of the `journey` object.
. Compile everything together.

To see an example of a test suite, see the https://github.com/elastic/synthetics[elastic/synthetics] repository.
You can use the `todo` directory if you'd like to test an example locally.
Clone the repository, change into the directory containing the synthetics test suite,
and install the necessary dependencies including `@elastic/synthetics`:

[source,sh]
----

> # Check out the synthetics repo and included examples

Reviewer 2: Let's stop recommending that repo and instead point folks at https://github.com/elastic/synthetics-demo , I thought I'd removed all references but I must have made an error. The problem with checking out the source repo is it can lead to weird node import errors. Also, we don't update the examples there as frequently

npm install
----

[NOTE]
==============
If you want to test your own suite locally, be sure to install the `@elastic/synthetics` package:

[source,sh]
----
npm install -g @elastic/synthetics
----
==============

From inside the directory containing the synthetics test suite you can run the provided tests.
By default, the `elastic-synthetics` runner will only run files matching the filename `*.journey.(ts|js)*`.

[source,sh]
----
# Run tests on the current directory. The dot `.` indicates
# that it should run all tests in the current directory.
npx @elastic/synthetics .
----

[discrete]
[[synthetics-test-suite-send]]
=== Send to {stack}

After testing locally, you can run the test suite using the Elastic Synthetics integration or {heartbeat}
depending on <<uptime-set-up-choose,the approach you chose>>.

--
include::tab-widgets/uptime-monitoring/run-test-suite-widget.asciidoc[]
--

[discrete]
[[synthetics-ci]]
== Run on CI

Besides running locally as end-to-end tests, you can run a synthetic test suite on your CI environment.

Elastic's synthetics runner can output results in a few different formats, including JSON and JUnit
(the standard format supported by most CI platforms).

> If any of your journeys fail, it will yield a non-zero exit code, which most CI systems pick up as a failure. 

Reviewer: Nit (unclear `it`, it seems that `journeys` yield a non-zero exit code, not the agent):

```suggestion
If any of your journeys fail, the synthetics agent it will yield a non-zero exit code, which most CI systems pick up as a failure by default.
```

git clone git@github.com:elastic/synthetics-demo.git &&\
cd synthetics-demo/todos/ &&\
# Install all required dependencies for the todos example
npm install
----

[NOTE]
==============
If you want to test your own suite locally, be sure to install the `@elastic/synthetics` package:

[source,sh]
----
npm install -g @elastic/synthetics
----
==============

From inside the directory containing the synthetics test suite, run the provided tests.
By default, the `elastic-synthetics` runner will only run files matching the filename `*.journey.(ts|js)*`.

[source,sh]
----
# Run tests on the current directory. The dot `.` indicates
# that it should run all tests in the current directory.
npx @elastic/synthetics .
----

[discrete]
[[synthetics-test-suite-send]]
=== Send to {stack}

After testing locally, you can run the test suite using the Elastic Synthetics integration or {heartbeat}
depending on <<uptime-set-up-choose,the approach you chose to set up>>.

--
include::tab-widgets/uptime-monitoring/run-test-suite-widget.asciidoc[]
--

[discrete]
[[synthetics-inline-journey]]
== Use an inline monitor

An inline monitor is a single journey that you manage individually.

> When writing a inline monitor, the `journey` keyword isn't required, and variables like `page` and `params` will be part of your script's scope.

Author: ```suggestion
When writing an inline monitor, the `journey` keyword isn't required, and variables like `page` and `params` will be part of your script's scope.
```

[[synthetic-run-tests]]
= Run synthetic tests

++++
<titleabbrev>Run synthetic tests</titleabbrev>
++++

There are two ways to run synthetic tests:

> * If you want to create a single journey and manage it in isolation from monitors containing other journeys,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you want to create a single journey and manage it individually,
```

<<synthetics-inline-journey,use an inline journey>>.

> Inline journeys can be more efficient, but have some limitations like not supporting dependencies or multiple journeys.
> * If you have multiple journeys, rely on dependencies, or your tests need to live with your
> application code, <<synthetics-test-suite,use a test suite>>.

Reviewer: I'd probably be a bit more precise with what we mean by efficient, otherwise it's kind of an empty statement IMO:

```suggestion
Inline monitors are quick and easy to setup. To create one, you can copy a journey's content, paste it into Kibana, and hit save. However, this type of monitor does not allow you to import third-party packages.

Inline monitors can also be more difficult to manage because each inline monitor can contain only _one_ journey, which must be maintained from within Kibana. Therefore, if you depend on external packages, have your journeys next to your code repo, or just wish to embed and manage multiple journeys from a single monitor configuration <<synthetics-test-suite,use a test suite>>.
```

PS: Here I'm also using the term "inline _monitor_". A journey is the code, while the monitor is what lives in Kibana.

[discrete]
[[synthetics-inline-journey]]

> == Use an inline journey

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Use an inline monitor
```

> The easiest way to run a synthetic test is by creating an inline journey.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The easiest way to run a synthetic test is by creating an inline monitor.
```

> The `journey` keyword isn't required, and access to variables like `page` and `params` is automatic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `journey` keyword isn't required, and variables like `page` and `params` will be part of your script's scope.
```

> You cannot `import` any dependencies using inline scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You cannot `import` any dependencies when using inline monitors.
```

> To test an inline example locally, change into your test's directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test the an inline monitor's journey locally, change into your test's directory
```

> and pipe the file contents to the `npx @elastic/synthetics` command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and pipe the journey's contents to the `npx @elastic/synthetics` command.
```

> For example, create a `sample.js` file containing steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assume, for example, that your inline monitor contains the following code:
```

IMO it's important that users know that an inline journey refers to the content of the journey, not to a specific file, which is why I'm suggesting this.

[source,js]
----
step('load homepage', async () => {
    await page.goto('https://www.elastic.co');
});
step('hover over products menu', async () => {
    await page.hover('css=[data-nav-item=products]');
});
----

> Then test the sample file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run that journey locally, you can save that code to a file and pipe the file's contents into `@elastic-synthetics`:
```

[source,sh]
----
cat path/to/sample.js | npx @elastic/synthetics --inline
----

And you'll get a response similar to:

[source,sh]
----
Journey: inline
   ✓  Step: 'load homepage' succeeded (1831 ms)
   ✓  Step: 'hover over products menu' succeeded (97 ms)

 2 passed (2511 ms)
----

After testing locally, you can copy the script into your
Elastic Synthetics integration or `heartbeat.yml`.

> * **{agent} and {fleet}**: Add an inline journey when configuring the Elastic Synthetics integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **{agent} and {fleet}**: Add an inline monitor when configuring the Elastic Synthetics integration.
```

In Monitor settings, use Monitor Type "Browser" and switch the Source Type to "Inline script".
See <<uptime-set-up>> for details.
* **{heartbeat}**: Copy and paste your test steps into `heartbeat.yml`.
{heartbeat} spawns a separate Node.js process, schedules your tests, and runs them on a Chromium browser.
See <<uptime-set-up-config>> for details.

// heartbeat
//
// [source,yml]
// ----
// - type: browser
//   id: elastic-website <1>
//   name: Elastic website
//   schedule: "@every 1m"
//   source:
//     inline:
//       script: |- <2>
//       step("load homepage", async () => {
//         await page.goto('https://www.elastic.co');
//       });
//       step("hover over products menu", async () => {
//         await page.hover('css=[data-nav-item=products]');
//       });
// ----
// <1> Each `monitor` gets its own ID in the {uptime-app} and, therefore its own schedule entry.
// This allows tests to be run in parallel and analyzed separately.

> // <2> In this example, a synthetic test is defined inline. This is a two-step script that first loads

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// <2> In this example, a synthetic journey is defined inline. This is a two-step script that first loads
```

// a homepage and then hovers over a product menu. See <<synthetics-syntax>> for more information.

[discrete]
[[synthetics-test-suite]]
== Use a test suite

> If you have a suite of tests to implement, you can use Elastic Synthetics as a library.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a suite of tests to implement, you can use `@elastic/synthetics` package as a library.
```

> In this method, you use Docker to run both {heartbeat} and `elastic-synthetics`.

Reviewer: Not sure if that's the case here. I thought we would use docker to run `heartbeat` but not `elastic-synthetics` as that oculd be run with `npx` only.  I don't see why one would use docker with `npm/node` to run the package tbh.

Author: This might be a relic from an earlier version of the text.

> To test an inline example locally, start by installing the `@elastic/synthetics` package globally:

Reviewer: I'd follow the inverse order here. I'd first tell users to write the tests, and only when the package is necessary I'd tell them to install it. Otherwise, they'll have downloaded something they'll only use in later steps.

Also, I think we should not say "to test an inline example locally" as this tutorial is about suites.

[source,sh]
----
npm install -g @elastic/synthetics
----

> Then write your tests:

Reviewer: I think we could include an example with 2 journeys rather than just having these bullet points here.

Author: 🔖  I'll come back to this.

. Create a new https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/commands/npm-init[NPM/Node.js project].
. Create a `javascript` or `typescript` file that imports your tests.
All synthetic test files must use the `.journey.ts` or `.journey.js` file extension.
. Make sure any dependencies are defined with an `import` outside of the `journey` object.
. Compile everything together.

Find examples in the https://github.com/elastic/synthetics[elastic/synthetics] repository.
If you'd like to test an example locally, clone the repository and install the example:

[source,sh]

> ----

Reviewer: I think it's a bit confusing that we're mixing our examples with the tutorial. I'd first write  the whole tutorial so that users can run it all without using examples at all. Only then I'd teach them how to run our examples.

Author: I'll come back to this.

# Check out the synthetics repo and included examples
git clone git@github.com:elastic/synthetics.git &&\
cd synthetics/examples/todos/ &&\
# Install all required dependencies for the todos example
npm install
----

You are now inside the synthetics test suite, which is also an NPM project.
From this folder, you can run the provided tests.

> By default only files matching the filename `*.journey.(ts|js)*` will be run.

Reviewer: Nit (active voice)

```suggestion
By default, the `elastic-synthetics` runner will only run files matching the filename `*.journey.(ts|js)*`.
```

// <2> In this example, our library of synthetic tests is downloaded from the
// remote zip endpoint for https://github.com/elastic/synthetics-demo/tree/main/todos/synthetics-tests[our todos example]. 
// <3> Note that the url refers to the endpoint where the test project exists.
// <4> Folder refers to the relative path where the synthetic journey files are located. {heartbeat} will invoke the synthetics library on this folder.
// <5> Username and password are blank here, but if provided, will be sent as HTTP Basic Authentication headers to the remote zip endpoint.

// agent

// beta[] Elastic Synthetics tests can be configured through {fleet} using the Elastic Synthetics integration. To learn more, see <<add-synthetics-integration,Elastic Synthetics>>.
//
// [role="screenshot"]
// image::images/synthetics-integration.png[Synthetics integration]
//
// In the example above, our library of synthetic tests is downloaded from the
// remote zip endpoint for the git repository for https://github.com/elastic/synthetics-demo/tree/main/todos/synthetics-tests[our todos example]. 
//

> // By using a git repository for synthetics journeys, we can benefit from a GitOps workflow for deploying changes to  synthetic monitors, enabling git features such as pull requests, reverts, etc. for managing tests more effectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// By using a git repository for synthetics journeys, you can benefit from a GitOps workflow, where your team would use `git` for deploying changes to  synthetic monitors. Others, could, for example, update monitors through pull requests or use `git revert` to revert changes which broke a monitor. Such a workflow allows you to manage tests more effectively.
```

//
// The fields should be set as follows:
//
// * *Zip URL*: URL pointing to a zip file containing the test project.
// * *Folder*: The folder within the zip file containing synthetics tests. This will be the working directory in which the synthetics agent runs. {heartbeat} will invoke the synthetics library in this folder. 
// * *Zip URL Username* and *Zip URL Password* HTTP Basic Authentication headers for the remote zip endpoint. 
// * *Params* JSON formatted dynamic values that may be required by your specific tests. See <<synthetics-params-secrets>> for more information.
//
// When applying the integration policy to an {agent} policy, make sure to select your dedicated synthetics agent policy.
//
// [role="screenshot"]
// image::images/synthetics-agent-policy-select.png[Synthetics integration]

[discrete]
[[synthetics-ci]]
== Run on CI

> In addition to replacing your end-to-end tests locally, you can run a synthetic test suite on your CI environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides running locally as end-to-end tests, you can run a synthetic test suite on your CI environment.
```
